---
title: Topology Cheat Sheet
---

Below is a "cheat sheet" on topology. It covers the definitons (and important theorems) of much of what is found in M367K at the University of Texas at Austin.

## Basic Topology

**Definition.** A *topology* $\mathcal{T}$ on a set $X$ is a collection of subsets of $X$ that satisfies the following properties:

1. $\emptyset$ and $X$ are in $\mathcal{T}$
2. An arbitrary union of elements of $\mathcal{T}$ is in $\mathcal{T}$.
3. A finite intersection of elements of $\mathcal{T}$ is in $\mathcal{T}$.

We call sets in the topology *open sets*. A *closed* set is a set in which its complement is open.

Let $X$ be a topological space, $A \subset X$ be a set. We define the following terms:

* The *interior* of $A$ (denoted $Int(A)$) is the largest open set contained within $A$. It may also be thought of as the union of all open sets contained in $A$.
* The *closure* of $A$ (denoted $\bar{A}$) is the intersection of all closed sets containing $A$. You may also think of this as the smallest closed set containing $A$.
* A *neighborhood* of a point $x \in X$ is an open set containing $x$.
* A *limit point* $x$ of $A$ is a point in which every neighborhood of $x$ intersects $A$ in a point other than $x$.
* The set of limit points of $A$ can be represented with $A'$.

From this, we can derive a few important properties:

* $\bar{A} = A \cup A'$. Proof: if $x \in \bar{A} \setminus A$, since $x \not \in A$ and $x \in \bar{A}$ then all neighborhoods of $x$ must intersect $A$ in a point other than $x$. Conversely, if $x \in A'$, then all neighborhoods of $x$ intersect $A$ at some point, so the complement closed set of these neighborhoods cannot be in the closure. Thus $x \in \bar{A}$.

**Definition.** A *basis* of a topology is a collection of subsets $\mathcal{B}$ of $X$ that satisfies the following properties:

1. For all $x \in X$, there exists a basis element $B \in \mathcal{B}$ such that $x \in B$.
2. If $x \in B_1$ and $x \in B_2$ for some $B_1, B_2 \in \mathcal{B}$, there exists $B_3 \in \mathcal{B}$ such that $x \in B_3$ and $B_3 \subset B_1 \cap B_2$.

**Definition.** The *topology $\mathcal{T}$ generated by $\mathcal{B}$* has open sets $U$ where for all $x \in U$ there exists $B \in \mathcal{B}$ such that $x \in B$ and $B \subset U$.

### Examples of Topologies

**Definition.** *Standard topology* on $\mathbb{R}$. A basis generating this is:

$$\mathcal{B} = \{ (a, b) \mid a, b \in \mathbb{R} \wedge a < b \}$$

In other words, the standard topology on $\mathbb{R}$ is generated by the open intervals.

**Definition.** The *order topology* has basis of:

* All open intervals $(a, b)$ in $X$.
* All intervals of the form $[a_0, b)$ in $X$, where $a_0$ is the smallest element in $X$.
* All intervals of the form $(a, b_0]$ in $X$, where $b_0$ is the largest element in $X$.

Note that the order topology on $\mathbb{R}$ is just the standard topology on $\mathbb{R}$, as $\mathbb{R}$ has no smallest or largest element.

**Definition.** *Product topology.* Let $X$, $Y$ be topological spaces with bases $\mathcal{B}$, $\mathcal{C}$ respectively. Then the basis for the product topology $\mathcal{D}$ is:

$$\mathcal{D} = \{ B \times C \mid B \in \mathcal{B} \wedge C \in \mathcal{C} \}$$

**Definition.** *Subspace topology.* Let $X$ be a space with topology $\mathcal{T}$, $Y \subset X$. Then the subspace topology $\mathcal{T}_y$ of $Y$ is:

$$\mathcal{T}_y = \{ Y \cap U \mid U \in \mathcal{T} \}$$

**Definition.** *Quotient topology.* Let $p: X \to A$ be a surjective continuous open map (quotient map). Let $\mathcal{T}$ be the topology on $X$. The *quotient topology* $\mathcal{T}_A$ on $A$ is:

$$\mathcal{T}_A = \{ U \subset A \mid p^{-1}(U) \in \mathcal{T} \}$$

### Continuity

**Definition.** A topological space $X$ is called a *Hausdorff space* if $\forall x_1, x_2 \in X$, $\exists U_1, U_2$ open neighborhoods of $x_1, x_2$ that are disjoint.

**Definition.** A function $f: X \to Y$ is called *continuous* if for all open sets $U \subset Y$, $f^{-1}(U)$ is open in X.

**Theorem.** Let $X$ and $Y$ be topological spaces and $f: X \to Y$. The following statements are equivalent:

1. $f$ is continuous.
2. For every $A \subset X$, $f(\bar{A}) \subset \overline{f(A)}$.
3. For every closed set $B \subset Y$, the set $f^{-1}(B)$ is closed in $X$.
4. For every $x \in X$ and neighborhood $V$ in $Y$ where $f(x) \subset V$, there is a neighborhood $U$ of $x$ such that $f(U) \subset V$.

**Definition.** A *homeomorphism* is a bijective function in which it and its inverse are continuous. This is often used as a definition of equality. Two spaces are called *homeomorphic* to each other if there exists a homeomorphism between the spaces.

**Example.** The open interval is homeomorphic to $\mathbb{R}$.

### Metric Spaces

Although this is a course on general topology, it is useful to cover metric spaces as they are relatively familiar.

**Definition.** A metric space $(X, d)$ is a set $X$ equipped with a *distance* function $d: X \times X \to \mathbb{R}$ which has the following properties:

1. $d(x, y) > 0$ if $x \not = y$
2. $d(x, x) = 0$
3. $d(x, y) = d(y, x)$
4. $d(x, y) + d(y, z) \geq d(x, z)$ (Triangle inequality)

**Definition.** Let $(X, d)$ be a metric space. A *ball* of radius $r$ around a point $x$ is denoted as $B_d(x, r)$ and is the set where:

$$B_d(x, r) := \{ y \mid d(x, y) < r \}$$

**Definition.** The *diameter* of $A$ is defined to be the number

$$diam(A) := \sup \{ d(a_1, a_2) \mid a_1, a_2 \in A \}$$

**Definition.** Let $(X, d)$ be a metric space. The *metric topology induced by $d$* is generated by a basis consisting of all balls. A topology is said to be *metrizable* if one can define a metric that generates the topology.

**Definition.** *Epsilon-Delta Continuity* is a definition of continuity applicable to metric spaces as follows:

$$(\forall \epsilon > 0)(\exists \delta > 0)(\forall x)(|x - \alpha| < \delta \implies |f(x) - f(\alpha)| < \epsilon)$$

$$(\exists \epsilon > 0)(\forall \delta > 0)(\exists x)(|x - \alpha| < \delta \not \implies |f(x) - f(\alpha)| < \epsilon)$$

**Theorem.** Every metric space is Hausdorff. Proof: Simply construct balls of radius $\epsilon/2$ around the points.

**Theorem.** Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division (without zero) of continuous functions are continuous.

**Proof.** Recall that the composition of continuous functions is continuous. Note that $+: \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}$ is continuous and $h(x) = f(x) \times g(x)$ is continuous, so addition of functions is just the composition of continuous functions $+ \circ h$ which is continuous.

## Connectedness

Let $X$ be a topological space. First, some definitions:

* A *separation* of $X$ is a pair of disjoint open non-empty subsets $U, V \subset X$.
* $X$ is called *connected* if no separation of $X$ exists.

**Definition.** Given a space $X4, we can define an equivalence relation $x ~ y$ if there is a connected subspace containing both $x$ and $y$. The equivalence classes are called *connected components* of $X$.

**Definition.** A *path* from $x$ to $y$ is a continuous function $f: [0, 1] \to X$ where $f(0) = x$ and $f(1) = y$. A space is said to be *path-connected* if for all $x, y \in X$ there exists a path.

**Example.** There exists a path between any two points in $\mathbb{R}^2$ -- the straight line path.

## Compactness

* A *cover* of $X$ is a union of sets which equals $X$.
* An *open cover* of $X$ is an open union of sets which equals $X$.
* $X$ is called *compact* if every open cover of $X$ has a finite subcover.

**Note.** Compactness of a space can be proved by finding an open set containing all but finitely many elements.

**Definition.** A collection $\mathcal{A}$ of subsets of a set $X$ is said to have the *finite intersection property* if the intersection over any finite subcollection of $\mathcal{A}$ is non-empty.

### Compactness in metric spaces

* $[a, b]$ is compact in $\mathbb{R}$.
* Any collection of closed sets in a compact $X$ with the finite intersection property has non-empty intersection over all elements in the collection.

**Theorem.** Let $(\mathbb{R}^n, d)$ be a metric space. For a subset $S$ of this space, the set is compact if and only if it is closed and bounded with respect to the usual Euclidean metric $d$.

**Proof.** TODO
